---
weight: 48
---

# Chapter 48

Moab is next set to the bar before Jeremiah the prophet, whom God has constituted judge over nations and kingdoms, from his mouth to receive its doom. Isaiah's predictions concerning Moab had had their accomplishment (we had the predictions Isa 15:1-16:14 and the like Am 2:1), and they were fulfilled when the Assyrians, under Salmanassar, invaded and distressed Moab. But this is a prophecy of the desolations of Moab by the Chaldeans, which were accomplished under Nebuzaradan, about five years after he had destroyed Jerusalem. Here is, I. The destruction foretold, that it should be great and general, should extend itself to all parts of the country (Jer 48:1-6,8, and again Jer 48:21-25,34), that spoilers should come upon them and force some to flee (Jer 48:9), should carry many into captivity (Jer 48:12,46), that the enemy should come shortly (Jer 48:16), come swiftly and surprise them (Jer 48:40,41), that he should make thorough work (Jer 48:10) and lay the country quite waste, though it was very strong (Jer 48:14,15), that there should be no escaping (Jer 48:42,45), that this should force them to quit their idols (Jer 48:13,35) and put an end to all their joy (Jer 48:33,34), that their neighbours shall lament them (Jer 48:17-19) and the prophet himself does (Jer 48:31,36, etc.). II. The causes of this destruction assigned; it was sin that brought this ruin upon them, their pride, and security, and carnal confidence (Jer 48:7,11,14,29), and their contempt of and enmity to God and his people, Jer 48:26,27,30. III. A promise of the restoration of Moab, Jer 48:48).

## The Judgment of Moab (605 BC)

> **¹** Against Moab thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled: Kiriathaim is confounded *and* taken: Misgab is confounded and dismayed.  
> **²** *There shall be* no more praise of Moab: in Heshbon they have devised evil against it; come, and let us cut it off from *being* a nation. Also thou shalt be cut down, O Madmen; the sword shall pursue thee.  
> **³** A voice of crying *shall be* from Horonaim, spoiling and great destruction.  
> **⁴** Moab is destroyed; her little ones have caused a cry to be heard.  
> **⁵** For in the going up of Luhith continual weeping shall go up; for in the going down of Horonaim the enemies have heard a cry of destruction.  
> **⁶** Flee, save your lives, and be like the heath in the wilderness.  
> **⁷** For because thou hast trusted in thy works and in thy treasures, thou shalt also be taken: and Chemosh shall go forth into captivity *with* his priests and his princes together.  
> **⁸** And the spoiler shall come upon every city, and no city shall escape: the valley also shall perish, and the plain shall be destroyed, as the LORD hath spoken.  
> **⁹** Give wings unto Moab, that it may flee and get away: for the cities thereof shall be desolate, without any to dwell therein.  
> **¹⁰** Cursed *be* he that doeth the work of the LORD deceitfully, and cursed *be* he that keepeth back his sword from blood.  
> **¹¹** Moab hath been at ease from his youth, and he hath settled on his lees, and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity: therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed.  
> **¹²** Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will send unto him wanderers, that shall cause him to wander, and shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles.  
> **¹³** And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Beth-el their confidence.  

We may observe in these verses,

I\. The author of Moab's destruction; it is *the Lord of hosts,* that has armies, all armies, at his command, and *the God of Israel* (Jer 48:1), who will herein plead the cause of his Israel against a people that have always been vexatious to them, and will punish them now for the injuries done to Israel of old, though Israel was forbidden to meddle with them (De 2:9), therefore the destruction of Moab is called *the work of the Lord* (Jer 48:10), for it is he that pleads for Israel; and his work will exactly agree with his word, Jer 48:8.

II\. The instruments of it: *Spoilers shall come* (Jer 48:8), shall come with a sword, a sword that shall *pursue them,* Jer 48:2. "*I will send unto him wanderers,* such as come from afar, as if they were vagrants, or had missed their way, but they shall *cause him to wander;* they seem as wanderers themselves, but they shall make the Moabites to be really wanderers, some to flee and others to be carried into captivity." These destroyers stir up themselves to do execution; they *have devised evil against Heshbon,* one of the principal cities of Moab, and they aim at no less than the ruin of the kingdom: *Come, and let us cut it off from being a nation* (Jer 48:2); nothing less will serve the turn of the invaders; they come, not to plunder it, but to ruin it. The prophet, in God's name, engages them to make thorough work of it (Jer 48:10): *Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully,* this bloody work, this destroying work; though it goes against the grain with men of compassion, yet it is *the work of the Lord,* and must not be done by the halves. The Chaldeans have it in charge, by a secret instinct (says Mr. Gataker), to destroy the Moabites, and therefore they must not spare, must not, out of foolish pity, *keep back their sword from blood;* they would thereby bring a sword, and a curse with it, upon themselves, as Saul did by sparing the Amalekites and Ahab by letting Benhadad go. *Thy life shall go for his life.* To this work is applied that general rule given to all that are employed in any service for God, *Cursed by he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully* or negligently, that pretends to do it, but does it not to purpose, makes a show of serving God's glory, but is really serving his own ends and carries on the work of the Lord no further than will suit his own purposes, or that is slothful in business for God and takes neither care nor pains to do it as it should be done, Mal 1:14. Let not such deceive themselves, for God will not thus be mocked.

III\. The woeful instances and effects of this destruction. The cities shall be laid in ruins; they shall be *spoiled* (Jer 48:1) and cut down (Jer 48:2); they shall be *desolate* (Jer 48:9), *without any to dwell therein;* there shall be no houses to dwell in, or no people to dwell in them, or no safety and ease to those that would dwell in them. *Every city shall be spoiled and no city shall escape.* The strongest city shall not be able to secure itself against the enemies' power, nor shall the finest city be able to recommend itself to the enemies' pity and favour. The *country* also shall be wasted, the *valley shall perish,* and the *plain be destroyed,* Jer 48:8. The corn and the flocks, which used to cover the plains and make the valleys rejoice, shall all be destroyed, eaten up, trodden down, or carried off. The most sacred persons shall not escape: The *priests and princes shall go together into captivity.* Nay, Chemosh, the god they worship, who, they hope, will protect them, shall share with them in the ruin; his temples shall be laid in ashes and his image carried away with the rest of the spoil. Now the consequence of all this will be, 1. Great shame and confusion: *Kirjathaim is confounded,* and Misgah is so. They shall be ashamed of the mighty boasts they have sometimes made of their cities: *There shall be no more vaunting in Moab concerning Heshbon* (so it might be read, Jer 48:2); they shall no more boast of the strength of that city when the evil which is designed against it is brought upon it. Nor shall they any more boast of their gods (Jer 48:13); they *shall be ashamed of Chemosh* (ashamed of all the prayers they have made to and all the confidence they put in that dunghill deity), *as Israel was ashamed of Beth-el,* of the golden calf they had at Beth-el, which they confided in as their protector, but were deceived in, for it was not able to save them from the Assyrians; nor shall Chemosh be able to save the Moabites from the Chaldeans. Note, Those that will not be convinced and made ashamed of the folly of their idolatry by the word of God shall be convinced and made ashamed of it by the judgments of God, when they shall find by woeful experience the utter inability of the gods they have served to do them any service. 2. There will be great sorrow; there is a *voice of crying* heard (Jer 48:3) and the cry is nothing but *spoiling and great destruction.* Alas! alas! *Moab is destroyed,* Jer 48:4. The great ones having quitted the cities to shift for their own safety, even the *little ones have caused a cry to be heard,* the meaner sort of people, or the little children, the innocent harmless ones, whose cries at such a time are the most piteous. Go up to the hills, go down to the valleys, and you meet with *continual weeping (weeping with weeping*); all are in tears; you meet none with dry eyes. Even the enemies have heard the cry, from whom it would have been policy to conceal it, for they will be animated and encouraged by it; but it is so great that it cannot be hid, 3. There will be great hurry; they will cry to one another, "Away, away! *flee; save your lives* (Jer 48:6); shift for your own safety with all imaginable speed, though you escape as bare and naked as the *heath,* or grig, or dry shrub, *in the wilderness;* think not of carrying away any thing you have, for it may cost you your life to attempt it, Mt 24:16-18. Take shelter, though it be in a barren wilderness, that you may have your lives for a prey. The danger will come suddenly and swiftly; and therefore *give wings unto Moab* (Jer 48:9); that would be the greatest kindness you could do them; that is what they will call for, *O that we had wings like a dove!* for unless they have wings, and can fly, there will be no escaping."

IV\. The sins for which God will now reckon with Moab, and which justify God in these severe proceedings against them. 1. It is because they have been secure, and have trusted in their wealth and strength, *in their works* and *in their treasures,* Jer 48:7. They had taken a great deal of pains to fortify their cities and make large works about them, and to fill their exchequer and private coffers, so that they thought themselves in as good a posture for war as any people could be and that none durst invade them, and therefore set danger at defiance. They trusted *in the abundance of their riches and strengthened themselves in their wickedness,* Ps 52:7. Now, for this reason, that they may have a sensible conviction of the vanity and folly of their carnal confidences, God will send an enemy that will master their works and rifle their treasures. Note, We forfeit the comfort of that creature which we repose that confidence in which should be reposed in God only. The reed will break that is leaned upon. 2. It is because they have not made a right improvement of the days of the peace and prosperity, Jer 48:11. (1.) They had been long undisturbed: *Moab has been at ease from his youth.* It was an ancient kingdom before Israel was, and had enjoyed great tranquillity, though a small country and surrounded with potent neighbours. God's Israel were afflicted from their youth (Ps 129:1,2), but *Moab at ease from his youth.* He has *not been emptied from vessel to vessel,* has not known any troublesome weakening changes, but is as wine kept on the lees, and not racked or drawn off, by which it retains its strength and body. He has not been unsettled, nor any way made uneasy; he has not *gone into captivity,* as Israel have often done, and yet Moab is a wicked idolatrous nation, and one of the confederates against *God's hidden ones,* Ps 83:3,6. Note, There are many that persist in unrepented iniquity and yet enjoy uninterrupted prosperity. (2.) They had been as long corrupt and unreformed: He *has settled on his lees;* he has been secure and sensual in his prosperity, has rested in it, and fetched all the strength and life of the soul from it, as the wine from the lees. *His taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed;* he is still the same, as bad as ever he was. Note, While bad people are as happy as they used to be in the world it is no marvel if they are bad as they used to be. They have no changes of their peace and prosperity, *therefore fear not God,* their hearts and lives are unchanged, Ps 55:19.

## The Judgment of Moab (605 BC)

> **¹⁴** How say ye, We *are* mighty and strong men for the war?  
> **¹⁵** Moab is spoiled, and gone up *out of* her cities, and his chosen young men are gone down to the slaughter, saith the King, whose name *is* the LORD of hosts.  
> **¹⁶** The calamity of Moab *is* near to come, and his affliction hasteth fast.  
> **¹⁷** All ye that are about him, bemoan him; and all ye that know his name, say, How is the strong staff broken, *and* the beautiful rod!  
> **¹⁸** Thou daughter that dost inhabit Dibon, come down from *thy* glory, and sit in thirst; for the spoiler of Moab shall come upon thee, *and* he shall destroy thy strong holds.  
> **¹⁹** O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way, and espy; ask him that fleeth, and her that escapeth, *and* say, What is done?  
> **²⁰** Moab is confounded; for it is broken down: howl and cry; tell ye it in Arnon, that Moab is spoiled,  
> **²¹** And judgment is come upon the plain country; upon Holon, and upon Jahazah, and upon Mephaath,  
> **²²** And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Beth-diblathaim,  
> **²³** And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Beth-gamul, and upon Beth-meon,  
> **²⁴** And upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near.  
> **²⁵** The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, saith the LORD.  
> **²⁶** Make ye him drunken: for he magnified *himself* against the LORD: Moab also shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in derision.  
> **²⁷** For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among thieves? for since thou spakest of him, thou skippedst for joy.  
> **²⁸** O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the cities, and dwell in the rock, and be like the dove *that* maketh her nest in the sides of the hole's mouth.  
> **²⁹** We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is exceeding proud) his loftiness, and his arrogancy, and his pride, and the haughtiness of his heart.  
> **³⁰** I know his wrath, saith the LORD; but *it shall* not *be* so; his lies shall not so effect *it.*  
> **³¹** Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I will cry out for all Moab; *mine heart* shall mourn for the men of Kirheres.  
> **³²** O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee with the weeping of Jazer: thy plants are gone over the sea, they reach *even* to the sea of Jazer: the spoiler is fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy vintage.  
> **³³** And joy and gladness is taken from the plentiful field, and from the land of Moab; and I have caused wine to fail from the winepresses: none shall tread with shouting; *their* shouting *shall be* no shouting.  
> **³⁴** From the cry of Heshbon *even* unto Elealeh, *and even* unto Jahaz, have they uttered their voice, from Zoar *even* unto Horonaim, *as* a heifer of three years old: for the waters also of Nimrim shall be desolate.  
> **³⁵** Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, saith the LORD, him that offereth in the high places, and him that burneth incense to his gods.  
> **³⁶** Therefore mine heart shall sound for Moab like pipes, and mine heart shall sound like pipes for the men of Kirheres: because the riches *that* he hath gotten are perished.  
> **³⁷** For every head *shall be* bald, and every beard clipped: upon all the hands *shall be* cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.  
> **³⁸** *There shall be* lamentation generally upon all the housetops of Moab, and in the streets thereof: for I have broken Moab like a vessel wherein *is* no pleasure, saith the LORD.  
> **³⁹** They shall howl, *saying,* How is it broken down! how hath Moab turned the back with shame! so shall Moab be a derision and a dismaying to all them about him.  
> **⁴⁰** For thus saith the LORD; Behold, he shall fly as an eagle, and shall spread his wings over Moab.  
> **⁴¹** Kerioth is taken, and the strong holds are surprised, and the mighty men's hearts in Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.  
> **⁴²** And Moab shall be destroyed from *being* a people, because he hath magnified *himself* against the LORD.  
> **⁴³** Fear, and the pit, and the snare, *shall be* upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, saith the LORD.  
> **⁴⁴** He that fleeth from the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for I will bring upon it, *even* upon Moab, the year of their visitation, saith the LORD.  
> **⁴⁵** They that fled stood under the shadow of Heshbon because of the force: but a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of Sihon, and shall devour the corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.  
> **⁴⁶** Woe be unto thee, O Moab! the people of Chemosh perisheth: for thy sons are taken captives, and thy daughters captives.  
> **⁴⁷** Yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab in the latter days, saith the LORD. Thus far *is* the judgment of Moab.  

The destruction is here further prophesied of very largely and with a great copiousness and variety of expression, and very pathetically and in moving language, designed not only to awaken them by a national repentance and reformation to prevent the trouble, or by a personal repentance and reformation to prepare for it, but to affect us with the calamitous state of human life, which is liable to such lamentable occurrences, and with the power of God's anger and the terror of his judgments, when he comes forth to contend with a provoking people. In reading this long roll of threatenings, and meditating on the terror of them, it will be of more use to us to keep this in our eye, and to get our hearts thereby possessed with a holy awe of God and of his wrath, than to enquire critically into all the lively figures and metaphors here used.

I\. It is a surprising destruction, and very sudden, that is here threatened. They were very secure, thought themselves *strong for war* and able to deal with the most powerful enemy (Jer 48:14), and yet the calamity is near, and he is not able to keep it off, nor so much as to keep the enemy long in parley, for the *affliction hastens fast* (Jer 48:16) and will soon come to a crisis. The enemy shall *fly as an eagle,* so swiftly, so strongly shall he come (Jer 48:40), as an eagle flies upon his prey, and *he shall spread his wings,* the wings of his army, *over Moab;* he shall surround it, that none may escape. *The strong-holds* of Moab are taken by *surprise* (Jer 48:41), so that all their strength stood them in no stead; and this made *the hearts* even of *their mighty men to fail,* for they had not time to recollect the considerations that might have animated them. It requires a more than ordinary degree of courage not to be *afraid of sudden fear.*

II\. It is an utter destruction, and such as lays Moab all in ruins: *Moab is spoiled* (Jer 48:15), quite spoiled, is *confounded and broken down* (Jer 48:20); their cities are laid in ashes, or seized by the enemy so that they are forced to quit them, Jer 48:15. Divers cities are here named, upon which judgment has come, and the list concludes with an *et cetera—and such like.* What occasion was there for him to mention more particulars when it comes *upon all the cities of Moab* in general, *far and near?* Jer 48:21-24. Note, When iniquity is universal we have reason to expect that calamity should be so too. The kingdom is deprived of its dignity and authority: *The horn of Moab is cut off,* the horn of its strength and power, both offensive and defensive; *his arm is broken,* that he can neither give a blow nor prevent a blow, Jer 48:25. Is the youth of the kingdom the strength and beauty of it? *His chosen young men have gone down to the slaughter,* Jer 48:15. They went down to the battle promising themselves that they should return victorious; but God told them that they went *down to the slaughter;* so sure are those to fall against whom God fights. In a word, *Moab shall be destroyed from being a people,* Jer 48:42. Those that are enemies to God's people will soon be made no people.

III\. It is a lamentable destruction; it will be just matter of mourning and will turn joy into heaviness. 1. The prophet that foretels it does himself lament it, and mourns at the very foresight of it, from a principle of compassion to his fellow-creatures and concern for human nature. The prophet will himself *howl for Moab;* his very *heart shall mourn for* them (Jer 48:31); he will *weep for the vine of Sibmah* (Jer 48:32); his *heart shall sound like pipes for Moab,* Jer 48:36. Though the destruction of Moab would prove him a true prophet, yet he could not think of it without trouble. The ruin of sinners is no pleasure to God, and therefore should be a pain to us; even those that give warning of it should lay it to heart. These passages, and many others in this chapter, are much the same with what Isaiah had used in his prophecies against Moab (Isa 15:16); for, though there was a long distance of time between that prophecy and this, yet they were both dictated by one and the same Spirit, and it becomes God's prophets to speak the language of those that went before them. It is no plagiarism sometimes to make use of old expressions, provided it be with new affections and applications. 2. The Moabites themselves shall lament it; it will be the greatest mortification and grief imaginable to them. Those that sat in *glory,* in the midst of wealth, and mirth, and all manner of pleasure, shall *sit in thirst,* in a dry and thirsty land, where no water, no comfort is, Jer 48:18. It is time for them to *sit in thirst,* and inure themselves to hardship, when *the spoiler has come,* who will strip them of all, and empty them. The Moabites in the remote corners of the country, that are furthest from the danger, will be inquisitive to know how the matter goes, what news from the army, will ask every one *that escapes, What is done?* Jer 48:19. And when they are told that all is gone, that the invader is the conqueror, they will *howl and cry,* in bitterness and anguish of spirit (Jer 48:20); they will abandon themselves to solitude, to lament the desolations of their country; they will *leave the cities* that used to be full of mirth, *and dwell in the rock* where they may have their full of melancholy; they shall no more be singing birds, but mourning birds, *like the dove* (Jer 48:28); *the doves of the valley,* Eze 7:16. Let those that give themselves up to mirth know that God can soon change their note. Their sorrow shall be so very extreme that they shall make themselves *bald and cut* themselves (Jer 48:37), which were expressions of a desperate grief, such as tempted men to be even their own destroyers. *Job* indeed *rent his mantle and shaved his head,* but he did not cut himself. When the flood of passion rises ever so high wisdom and grace must set bounds to it, set banks to it, to restrain it from such barbarities. The sorrow shall be universal (Jer 48:38): *There shall be a general lamentation upon all the house-tops of Moab,* where they worshipped their idols, to whom they shall in vain bemoan themselves, *and in* all *the streets,* where they conversed with one another, for they shall be free in communicating their grief and fears and in propagating them; for they see all lost: "*I have broken Moab like a vessel wherein is no pleasure,* which shall not be regarded and cannot be pieced again." That which Moab used to rejoice in was their pleasant fruits and the abundance of their rich wines. The delights of sense were all the matter of their joy. Take away these, destroy their gardens and vineyards, and you make *all their mirth to cease,* Ho 2:11,12. There is great weeping when their plants are transplanted, *have gone over the sea* (Jer 48:32), are carried into other countries, to be planted there. *The spoiler has fallen upon thy summer-fruits and upon thy vintage,* and it is this that makes *the cry of Heshbon* to reach *even to Elealeh,* Jer 48:34. *Take joy and gladness from the plentiful field, and* you take it *from the land of Moab,* Jer 48:33. If *the wine fail from the wine-presses,* that used to be trodden with acclamations of joy, all their gladness is cut off. Take away that shouting, and there shall be no shouting. Note, Those who make the delights of sense their chief joy, their exceeding joy, since these are things they may easily be deprived of in a little time subject themselves to the tyranny of the greatest grief; whereas those who rejoice in God may do that even when *the fig-tree does not blossom and there is no fruit in the vine.* These Moabites lost not only their wine, but their water too: Even *the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate* (Jer 48:34), and therefore their grief grew extravagantly loud and noisy, and their lamentations were heard in all placed like the lowing of *a heifer of three years old.* The expressions here are borrowed from Isa 15:5,6. 3. All their neighbours are called to mourn with them, and to condole with them on their ruin (Jer 48:17): *All you that are about him bemoan him,* Let him have that allay to his grief, let him see himself pities by the adjoining countries. Nay, let those at a distance, who do but *know his name* and have heard of his reputation, take notice of his fall, and say, *How is the strong staff broken,* whose strength was the terror of its enemies, *and the beautiful rod,* whose beauty was the pride of its friends! Let the nations take notice of this and receive instruction. Let none be puffed up with or put confidence in their strength or beauty, for neither will be a security against the judgments of God.

IV\. It is a shameful destruction and such as shall expose them to contempt: *Moab is made drunk* (Jer 48:26), and he that is made drunk is made vile; he *shall wallow in his vomit,* and become an odious spectacle, *and shall*justly *be in derision.* Let the Moabites be intoxicated with the cup of God's wrath till they stagger and fall, and be brought to *their wits' end,* and make themselves ridiculous by the wildness not only of their passions but of their counsels. And again (Jer 48:39): *Moab shall be a derision and a dismaying to all about him;* they shall laugh at the fall of the pomp and power he was so proud of. Note, Those that are haughty are preparing reproach and ignominy for themselves.

V\. It is the destruction of that which is dear to them, not only of their summer fruits and their vintage, but of their wealth (Jer 48:36): *The riches that he has gotten have perished,* though he thought he had laid them up very safely, and promised himself a long enjoyment of them, yet they are gone. Note, The money that is hoarded in the chest is as liable to perishing as the summer-fruits that lie exposed in the open field. Riches are shedding things, and, like dust as they are, slip through our fingers even when we are in most care to hold them fast and gripe them hard. Yet this is not the worst; even those whose religion was false and foolish were fond of it above any thing, and, such as it was, would not part with it; and therefore, though it was really a promise, yet to them it was a threatening (Jer 48:35), that God *will cause to cease him that offers in the high places,* for the high places shall be destroyed, and the fields of offerings shall be laid waste, and the priests themselves, *who burnt incense to their gods,* shall be slain or carried into captivity, Jer 48:7. Note, It is only the true religion, and the worship and service of the true God, that will stand us in stead in a day of trouble.

VI\. It is a just and righteous destruction, and that which they have deserved and brought upon themselves by sin.

1\. The sin which they had been most notoriously guilty of, and for which God now reckoned with them, was pride. It is mentioned six times, Jer 48:29. *We have* all *heard of the pride of Moab;* his neighbours took notice of it; it has testified to his face, as Israel's did; *he is exceedingly proud,* and grows worse and worse. Observe *his loftiness, his arrogancy, his pride, his haughtiness;* the multiplying of words to the same purport intimates in how many instances he discovered his pride, and how offensive it was both to God and man. It was charged upon them Isa 16:6, but here it is expressed more largely that there. Since then they had been under humbling providences, and yet were unhumbled; nay, they grew more arrogant and haughty, which plainly marked them for that utter destruction of which pride is the forerunner. Two instances are here given of the pride of Moab:— (1.) He had conducted himself insolently towards God. He must be brought down with shame (Jer 48:26), for *he* has *magnified himself against the Lord;* and again (Jer 48:42), he *shall be destroyed from being a people,* for this very reason. The Moabites preferred Chemosh before Jehovah, and thought themselves a match for the God of Israel, whom they set at defiance. (2.) He had conducted himself scornfully towards Israel, particularly in their late troubles; therefore Moab shall fall into the same troubles; into the same hands, and be a derision, for Israel was *a derision to him,* Jer 48:26,27. The generality of the Moabites, when they heard of the calamities and desolations of their neighbours the Jews, instead of lamenting them, rejoiced in them, they *skipped for joy.* Many, in such a case, entertain in their minds a secret pleasure at the fall of those they had a dislike to, who yet have so much discretion as to conceal it; it is so invidious a thing. But the Moabites industriously proclaimed their joy, and avowed the enmity they had to Israel, triumphing over every Israelite they met with in distress and laughing at him, which was as inhuman as it was impious and an impudent affront both to man, whose nature they were of, and to God, whose name they were called by. Note, Those that deride others in distress will justly and certainly, sooner or later, come into distress themselves, and be had in derision. Those that are *glad at calamities,* especially the calamities of God's church, *shall not* long *go unpunished.*

2\. Besides this they had been guilty of malice against God's people, and treachery in their dealings with them, Jer 48:30. They made a jest of the desolations of Judah and Jerusalem, and pretended, when they laughed at them, that it was but in sport and to make themselves merry; but, says God, "*I know his wrath;* I know it comes from the old enmity he has to the seed of Abraham and the worshippers of the true God. *I know* he thinks these calamities of the Jewish nation will end in their utter extirpation. He now tells the Chaldeans what bad people the Jews are, and irritates them against them; *but it shall not be so* as he expects; *his lies shall not so effect it.* The nation, whose fall they triumph in, shall recover itself." Some read it, *I know his rage. Is it not so?* Is he not very furious against the people of God? And *his lies I know* also. *Do they not do so?* Do they not belie them? Note, All the fury and all the falsehood of the church's enemies are perfectly known to God, whatever the pretenses are with which they think to cover them, Isa 37:28.

VII\. It is a complicated destruction, and by one instance after another will at length be completed; for those that make their escape from one judgment shall perish by another: *Fear, and the pit, and the snare, shall be upon them,* Jer 48:43. There shall be fear to drive them into the pit, and a snare to hold them fast in it when they are in it; so that they shall neither escape from the destruction nor escape out of it. What was said of sinners in general (Isa 24:17,18), that those who *flee from the fear shall fall into the pit* and those who come *up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare,* is here particularly foretold concerning the sinners of Moab (Jer 48:44); for it is *the year of their visitation,* when God comes to reckon with them, and will be *known by the judgments which he executes,* for he is *the King whose name is the Lord of hosts* (Jer 48:15); he is not only *the King* who has authority to give judgment, but he is *the Lord of hosts,* who is able to do what he has determined. The figurative expressions used Jer 48:44 are explained in one instance (Jer 48:45): *Those that fled* out of the villages for fear of the enemy's forces put themselves *under the shadow of Heshbon,* stood there, and supposed they stood safely, as now armies sometimes retire under the cannon of a fortified city, and it is their protection; but here they should be disappointed, for, when *they flee out of the pit, they fall into the snare;* Heshbon, which they thought would shelter them, devours them as Moses had foretold long since (Nu 21:28): *A fire has gone out of Heshbon,* and *a flame from the city of Sihon,* and devours those that come from all *the corners of Moab,* and fastens upon *the crown of the head of the tumultuous* noisy *ones,* or of the revellers, or children of noise, not meant of the rude clamorous multitude, but of the great men, who bluster, and hector, and make a noise; the judgments of God shall light on them. Shall we hear the conclusion of this whole matter? We have it (Jer 48:46): "*Woe be to thee, O Moab!* thou art undone; *the people* that worship *Chemosh perish,* and are gone; farewell, Moab. *Thy sons* and *daughters,* the hopes of the next generation, have gone into captivity after the Jews, whose calamities they rejoiced in."

VIII\. Yet it is not a perpetual destruction. The chapter concludes with a short promise of their return out of *captivity in the latter days.* God, who brings them into captivity, *will bring again* their *captivity,* Jer 48:47. Thus tenderly does God deal with Moabites, much more with his own people! Even with Moabites he *will not contend for ever, nor be always wrath.* When Israel returned, Moab did; and perhaps the prophecy was intended chiefly for the encouragement of God's people to hope for that salvation which even Moabites shall share in. Yet it looks further, to gospel times; the Jews themselves refer it to the days of the Messiah; then the captivity of the Gentiles, under the yoke of sin and Satan, shall be brought back by divine grace, which shall *make them free, free indeed.* This prophecy concerning Moab is long, but here it ends; it ends comfortably: *Thus far is the judgment of Moab.*

