---
weight: 46
---

# Chapter 46

In this chapter we have, I. Some further rules given both to the priests and to the people, relating to their worship, Eze 46:1-15. II. A law concerning the prince's disposal of his inheritance, Eze 46:16-18. III. A description of the places provided for the boiling of the sacrifices and the baking of the meat-offerings, Eze 46:19-24.

## Rules Relating to Worship. (b. c. 574.)

> <sup>1</sup> Thus saith the Lord GOD; The gate of the inner court that looketh toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened.  
> <sup>2</sup> And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of *that* gate without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go forth; but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.  
> <sup>3</sup> Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of this gate before the LORD in the sabbaths and in the new moons.  
> <sup>4</sup> And the burnt offering that the prince shall offer unto the LORD in the sabbath day *shall be* six lambs without blemish, and a ram without blemish.  
> <sup>5</sup> And the meat offering *shall be* an ephah for a ram, and the meat offering for the lambs as he shall be able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.  
> <sup>6</sup> And in the day of the new moon *it shall be* a young bullock without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shall be without blemish.  
> <sup>7</sup> And he shall prepare a meat offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs according as his hand shall attain unto, and a hin of oil to an ephah.  
> <sup>8</sup> And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch of *that* gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.  
> <sup>9</sup> But when the people of the land shall come before the LORD in the solemn feasts, he that entereth in by the way of the north gate to worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in, but shall go forth over against it.  
> <sup>10</sup> And the prince in the midst of them, when they go in, shall go in; and when they go forth, shall go forth.  
> <sup>11</sup> And in the feasts and in the solemnities the meat offering shall be an ephah to a bullock, and an ephah to a ram, and to the lambs as he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.  
> <sup>12</sup> Now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering or peace offerings voluntarily unto the LORD, *one* shall then open him the gate that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, as he did on the sabbath day: then he shall go forth; and after his going forth *one* shall shut the gate.  
> <sup>13</sup> Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt offering unto the LORD *of* a lamb of the first year without blemish: thou shalt prepare it every morning.  
> <sup>14</sup> And thou shalt prepare a meat offering for it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of a hin of oil, to temper with the fine flour; a meat offering continually by a perpetual ordinance unto the LORD.  
> <sup>15</sup> Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the meat offering, and the oil, every morning *for* a continual burnt offering.  

Whether the rules for public worship here laid down were designed to be observed, even in those things wherein they differed from the law of Moses, and were so observed under the second temple, is not certain; we find not in the history of that latter part of the Jewish church that they governed themselves in their worship by these ordinances, as one would think they should have done, but only by law of Moses, looking upon this *then* in the next age after as mystical, and not literal. We may observe, in these verses,

I\. That the place of worship was fixed, and rules were given concerning that, both to prince and people.

1\. The east gate, which was kept shut at other times, was to be opened on the sabbath days, on the moons (Eze 46:1), and whenever the prince offered a voluntary offering, Eze 46:12. Of the keeping of this gate ordinarily shut we read before (Eze 44:2); whereas the other gates of the court were opened every day, this was opened only on high days and on special occasions, when it was opened for the prince, who was to *go in by the way of the porch of that gate,* Eze 46:2,8. Some think he went in with the priests and Levites into the *inner court* (for into that court this gate was the entrance), and they observe that magistrates and ministers should join forces, and go the same way, hand in hand, in promoting the service of God. But it should rather seem that he did not go *through* the gate (as the glory of the Lord had done), though it was open, but he went *by the way of the porch of the gate,* stood *at the post of the gate,* and *worshipped at the threshold of the gate* (Eze 46:2), where he had a full view of the priests' performances at the altar, and signified his concurrence in them, for himself and for the people of the land, that stood behind him *at the door of that gate,* Eze 46:3. Thus must every prince show himself to be of David's mind, who would very willingly be a *door-keeper in the house of his God,* and, as the word there is, *lie at the threshold,* Ps 84:10. Note, The greatest of men are less than the least of the ordinances of God. Even princes themselves, when they draw near to God, must worship *with reverence and godly fear,* owning that even they are unworthy to approach to him. But Christ is *our prince,* whom God causes to *draw near* and *approach to him,* Jer 30:21.

2\. As to the north gate and south gate, by which they entered into the *court of the people* (not into the inner court), there was this rule given, that whoever came in at the *north gate* should go out at the *south gate,* and whoever came in at the *south gate* should go out at the *north gate,* Eze 46:9. Some think this was to prevent thrusting and jostling one another; for God is *the God of order, and not of confusion.* We may suppose that they came in at the gate that was next their own houses, but, when they went away, God would have them go out at that gate which would lead them *the furthest way about,* that they might have time for meditation; being thereby obliged to go a great way round the sanctuary, they might have an opportunity *to consider the palaces* of it, and, if they improved their time well in fetching this circuit, they would call it the nearest way home. Some observe that this may remind us, in the service of God, to be still pressing forward (Php 3:13) and not to *look back,* and, in our attendance upon ordinances, not to go back as we came, but more holy, and heavenly, and spiritual.

3\. It is appointed that *the people shall worship at the door of the east gate,* where the prince does, he at the head and they attending him, both *on the sabbath and on the new moons* (Eze 46:3), and that, when they come in and go out, the prince shall be *in the midst of them,* Eze 46:10. Note, Great men should, by their constant and reverent attendance on God in public worship, give a good example to their inferiors, both engaging them and encouraging them to do likewise. It is a very graceful becoming thing for persons of quality to go to church with their servants, and tenants, and poor neighbours about them, and to behave themselves there with an air of seriousness and devotion; and those who thus honour God with their honour he will delight to honour.

II\. That the ordinances of worship were fixed. Though the prince is supposed himself to be a very hearty zealous friend to the sanctuary, yet it is not left to him, no, not in concert with the priests, to appoint what sacrifices shall be offered, but God himself appoints them; for it is his prerogative to institute the rites and ceremonies of religious worship. 1. Every morning, as duly as the morning came, they must offer *a lamb* for a *burnt-offering,* Eze 46:13. It is strange that no mention is made of the evening sacrifice; but Christ having come, and having offered himself now *in the end of the world* (Heb 9:26), we are to look upon him as the evening sacrifice, about the time of the offering up of which he died. 2. On the sabbath days, whereas by the law of Moses four lambs were to be offered (Nu 28:9), it is here appointed that (at the prince's charge) there shall be *six lambs* offered, *and a ram* besides (Eze 46:4), to intimate how much we should abound in sabbath work, now in gospel-time, and what plenty of the spiritual sacrifices of prayer and praise we should offer up to God on that day; and, if *with such sacrifice God is well-pleased,* surely we have a great deal of reason to be so. 3. On the new moons, in the beginning of their months, there was over and above the usual sabbath-sacrifices the additional offering of a young bullock, Eze 46:6. Those who do much for God and their souls, statedly and constantly, must yet, upon some occasions, do still more. 4. All the sacrifices were to be *without blemish;* so Christ, the great sacrifice, was (1Pe 1:19), and so Christians, who are to present themselves to God as living sacrifices, should aim and endeavour to be—*blameless, and harmless, and without rebuke.* 5. All the sacrifices were to have their meat-offerings annexed to them, for so the law of Moses had appointed, to show what a good table God keeps in his house and that we ought to honour him with the fruit of our ground as well as with the fruit of our cattle, because in both he has blessed us, De 28:4. In the beginning, Cain offered the one and Abel the other. Some observe that the meat-offerings here are much larger in proportion than they were by the law of Moses. Then the proportion was *three tenth-deals to a bullock,* and *two to a ram* (so many tenth parts of an ephah) and half a hin of oil at the most (Nu 15:6-9); but here, for every bullock and every ram, a whole ephah and a whole hin of oil (Eze 46:7), which intimates that under the gospel, the great atoning sacrifice having been offered, these unbloody sacrifices shall be more abounded in; or, in general, it intimates that as now, under the gospel, God abounds in the gifts of his grace to us, more than under the law, so we should abound in the returns of praise and duty to him. But it is observable that in the meat-offering *for the lambs* the prince is allowed to offer *as he shall be able to give* (Eze 46:5,6,11), *as his hand shall attain unto.* Note, Princess themselves must spend as they can afford; and even in that which is laid out in works of piety God expects and requires but that we should do according to our ability, every man *as God has prepared him,* 1Co 16:2. God has not *made us to serve with an offering* (Isa 43:23), but considers our frame and state. Yet this will not countenance those who pretend a disability that is not real, or those who by their extravagances in other things disable themselves to do the good they should. And we find those praised who, in an extraordinary case of charity, went not *only to their power,* but *beyond their power.*

## Laws Concerning the Prince's Inheritance. (b. c. 574.)

> <sup>16</sup> Thus saith the Lord GOD; If the prince give a gift unto any of his sons, the inheritance thereof shall be his sons'; it *shall be* their possession by inheritance.  
> <sup>17</sup> But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, then it shall be his to the year of liberty; after it shall return to the prince: but his inheritance shall be his sons' for them.  
> <sup>18</sup> Moreover the prince shall not take of the people's inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession; *but* he shall give his sons inheritance out of his own possession: that my people be not scattered every man from his possession.  

We have here a law for the limiting of the power of the prince in the disposing of the crown-lands. 1. If he have a *son* that is a favourite, or has merited well, he may, if he please, as a token of his favour and in recompence for his services, settle some parts of his lands upon him and his heirs for ever (Eze 46:16), provided it do not go out of the family. There may be a cause for parents, when their children have grown up, to be more kind to one than to another, as Jacob gave to Joseph one portion *above his brethren,* Ge 48:22. 2. Yet, if he have a servant that is a favourite, he may not in like manner settle lands upon him, Eze 46:17. The servant might have the rents, issues, and profits, for such a term, but the inheritance, the *jus proprietarium—the right of proprietorship,* shall remain in the prince and his heirs. It was fit that a difference should be put between a child and a servant, like that Joh 8:35. *The servant abides not in the house for ever,* as the son does. 3. What estates he gives his children must be of his own (Eze 46:18): He *shall not take of the people's inheritance,* under pretence of having many children to provide for; he shall not find ways to make them forfeit their estates, or to force them to sell them and so *thrust his subjects out of their possession;* but let him and his sons be content with their own. It is far from being a prince's honour to increase the wealth of his family and crown by encroaching upon the rights and properties of his subjects; nor will he himself be a gainer by it at last, for he will be but a poor prince when the people are *scattered every man from his possession,* when they quit their native country, being forced out of it by oppression, choosing rather to live among strangers that are free people, and where what they have they can call their own, be it ever so little. It is the interest of princes to rule in the hearts of their subjects, and then all they have is, in the best manner, at their service. It is better for themselves to gain their affections by protecting their rights than to gain their estates by invading them.

## Buildings about the Temple. (b. c. 574.)

> <sup>19</sup> After he brought me through the entry, which *was* at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers of the priests, which looked toward the north: and, behold, there *was* a place on the two sides westward.  
> <sup>20</sup> Then said he unto me, This *is* the place where the priests shall boil the trespass offering and the sin offering, where they shall bake the meat offering; that they bear *them* not out into the utter court, to sanctify the people.  
> <sup>21</sup> Then he brought me forth into the utter court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and, behold, in every corner of the court *there was* a court.  
> <sup>22</sup> In the four corners of the court *there were* courts joined of forty *cubits* long and thirty broad: these four corners *were* of one measure.  
> <sup>23</sup> And *there was* a row *of building* round about in them, round about them four, and *it was* made with boiling places under the rows round about.  
> <sup>24</sup> Then said he unto me, These *are* the places of them that boil, where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people.  

We have here a further discovery of buildings about the temple, which we did not observe before, and those were places to boil the flesh of the offerings in, Eze 46:20. He that kept such a plentiful table at his altar needed large kitchens; and a wise builder will provide conveniences of that kind. Observe, 1. Where those boiling-places were situated. There were some at the entry into the inner court (Eze 46:19) and others under the rows, in the four corners of the outer court, Eze 46:21-23. These were the places where, it is likely, there was most room to spare for this purpose; and this purpose was found for the spare room, that none might be lost. It is a pity that holy ground should be waste ground. 2. What use they were put to. In those places they were to *boil the trespass-offering and the sin-offering,* those parts of them which were allotted to the priests and which were more sacred than the flesh of the peace-offerings, of which the offerer also had a share. There also they were to *bake the meat-offering,* their share of it, which they had from the altar for their own tables, Eze 46:20. Care was taken that they should not *bear them out into the outer court, to sanctify the people.* Let them not pretend to sanctify the people with this holy flesh, and so impose upon them; or let not the people imagine that by touching those sacred things they were sanctified, and made any the better or more acceptable to God. It should seem (from Hag 2:12) that there were those who had such a conceit; and therefore the priests must not carry any of the holy flesh away with them, lest they should encourage that conceit. Ministers must take heed of doing any thing to bolster up ignorant people in their superstitious vanities.

