---
title: "1 Kings 7 | Read the Complete Matthew Henry Bible Commentary Online"
linkTitle: "7"
description: "As, in the story of David, one chapter of wars and victories follows another, so, in the story of Solomon, one chapter concerning his buildings follows another. In this chapter we ..."
weight: 7
---

# 1 Kings 7 

As, in the story of David, one chapter of wars and victories follows another, so, in the story of Solomon, one chapter concerning his buildings follows another. In this chapter we have, I. His fitting up several buildings for himself and his own use, 1Ki 7:1-12. II. His furnishing the temple which he had built for God, 1. With two pillars, 1Ki 7:13-22. 2. With a molten sea, 1Ki 7:23-26. 3. With ten basins of brass (1Ki 7:27-37), and ten layers upon them, 1Ki 7:38,39. 4. With all the other utensils of the temple, 1Ki 7:40-50. 5. With the things that his father had dedicated, 1Ki 7:51. The particular description of these things was not needless when it was written, nor is it now useless.

## The Building of the Temple (1004 BC)

> **¹** But Solomon was building his own house thirteen years, and he finished all his house.  
> **²** He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon; the length thereof *was* a hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams upon the pillars.  
> **³** And *it was* covered with cedar above upon the beams, that *lay* on forty five pillars, fifteen *in* a row.  
> **⁴** And *there were* windows *in* three rows, and light *was* against light *in* three ranks.  
> **⁵** And all the doors and posts *were* square, with the windows: and light *was* against light *in* three ranks.  
> **⁶** And he made a porch of pillars; the length thereof *was* fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits: and the porch *was* before them: and the *other* pillars and the thick beam *were* before them.  
> **⁷** Then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge, *even* the porch of judgment: and *it was* covered with cedar from one side of the floor to the other.  
> **⁸** And his house where he dwelt *had* another court within the porch, *which* was of the like work. Solomon made also a house for Pharaoh's daughter, whom he had taken *to wife,* like unto this porch.  
> **⁹** All these *were of* costly stones, according to the measures of hewed stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and *so* on the outside toward the great court.  
> **¹⁰** And the foundation *was of* costly stones, even great stones, stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.  
> **¹¹** And above *were* costly stones, after the measures of hewed stones, and cedars.  
> **¹²** And the great court round about *was* with three rows of hewed stones, and a row of cedar beams, both for the inner court of the house of the LORD, and for the porch of the house.  

Never had any man so much of the spirit of building as Solomon had, nor to better purpose; he began with the temple, built for God first, and then all his other buildings were comfortable. The surest foundations of lasting prosperity are those which are laid in an early piety, Mt 6:33. 1. He built a house for himself (1Ki 7:1), *where he dwelt,* 1Ki 7:8. His father had built a good house; but it was no reflection upon his father for him to build a better, in proportion to the estate wherewith God had blessed him. Much of the comfort of this life is connected with an agreeable house. He was thirteen years building this house, whereas he built the temple in little more than seven years; not that he was more exact, but less eager and intent, in building his own house than in building God's. He was in no haste for his own palace, but impatient till the temple was finished and fit for use. Thus we ought to prefer God's honour before our own ease and satisfaction. 2. He built *the house of the forest at Lebanon* (1Ki 7:2), supposed to be a country seat near Jerusalem, so called from the pleasantness of its situation and the trees that encompassed it. I rather incline to think that it was a house built in the forest of Lebanon itself, whither (though far distant from Jerusalem) Solomon (having so many chariots and horses, and those dispersed into chariot-cities, which probably were his stages) might frequently retire with ease. It does not appear that his throne (mentioned 1Ki 7:7) was at the house of the forest of Lebanon, and it was not at all improper to put his shields there as in a magazine. Express notice is taken of his buildings, not only in Jerusalem, but in Lebanon (1Ki 9:19), and we read of the tower of Lebanon, which looks towards Damascus (So 7:4), which probably was part of this house. A particular account is given of this house, that being built in Lebanon, a place famed for cedars, the pillars, and beams, and roof, were all cedar (1Ki 7:2,3), and, being designed for pleasant prospects, there were three tiers of windows on each side, *light against light* (1Ki 7:4,5), or, as it may be read, *prospect against prospect.* Those whose lost i cast in the country may be well reconciled to a country life by this, that some of the greatest princes have thought those the most pleasant of their days which they have spent in their country retirements. 3. He built piazzas before one of his houses, either that at Jerusalem or that in Lebanon, which were very famous—a porch of pillars (1Ki 7:6), perhaps for an exchange or a guard-house, or for those to walk in that attended him about business till they could have audience, or for state and magnificence. He himself speaks of Wisdom's building her house, and *hewing out her seven pillars* (Pr 9:1), for the shelter of those that, three verses before (1Ki 8:34), are said to *watch daily at her gates and to wait at the posts of her doors.* 4. At his house where he dwelt in Jerusalem he built a great hall, or porch of judgment, where was set the throne, or king's bench, for the trial of causes, in which he himself was appealed to (*placita coram ipso rege tenenda—causes were to be adjusted in the king's presence,*) and this was richly wainscoted with cedar, from the floor to the roof, 1Ki 7:7. He had there also *another court within the porch,* nearer his house, of similar work, for his attendants to walk in, 1Ki 7:8. 5. He built a house for his wife, where she kept her court, 1Ki 7:8. It is said to be *like the porch,* because built of cedar like it, though not in the same form; this, no doubt, was nearer adjoining to his own palace, yet perhaps if it had been as near as it ought to have been Solomon would not have multiplied wives as he did.

The wonderful magnificence of all these buildings is taken notice of, 1Ki 7:9-12, etc. All the materials were the best of their kind. The foundation-stones were costly for their size, four or five yards square, or at least so many yards long (1Ki 7:10), and the stones of the building were costly for the workmanship, hewn and sawn, and in all respects finely wrought, 1Ki 7:9,11. The court of his own house was like that of the temple (1Ki 7:12, 1Ki 6:36); so well did he like the model of God's courts that he made his own by it.

> **¹³** And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.  
> **¹⁴** He *was* a widow's son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father *was* a man of Tyre, a worker in brass: and he was filled with wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought all his work.  
> **¹⁵** For he cast two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high apiece: and a line of twelve cubits did compass either of them about.  
> **¹⁶** And he made two chapiters *of* molten brass, to set upon the tops of the pillars: the height of the one chapiter *was* five cubits, and the height of the other chapiter *was* five cubits:  
> **¹⁷** *And* nets of checker work, and wreaths of chain work, for the chapiters which *were* upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one chapiter, and seven for the other chapiter.  
> **¹⁸** And he made the pillars, and two rows round about upon the one network, to cover the chapiters that *were* upon the top, with pomegranates: and so did he for the other chapiter.  
> **¹⁹** And the chapiters that *were* upon the top of the pillars *were* of lily work in the porch, four cubits.  
> **²⁰** And the chapiters upon the two pillars *had pomegranates* also above, over against the belly which *was* by the network: and the pomegranates *were* two hundred in rows round about upon the other chapiter.  
> **²¹** And he set up the pillars in the porch of the temple: and he set up the right pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin: and he set up the left pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz.  
> **²²** And upon the top of the pillars *was* lily work: so was the work of the pillars finished.  
> **²³** And he made a molten sea, ten cubits from the one brim to the other: *it was* round all about, and his height *was* five cubits: and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.  
> **²⁴** And under the brim of it round about *there were* knops compassing it, ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about: the knops *were* cast in two rows, when it was cast.  
> **²⁵** It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east: and the sea *was set* above upon them, and all their hinder parts *were* inward.  
> **²⁶** And it *was* a hand breadth thick, and the brim thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies: it contained two thousand baths.  
> **²⁷** And he made ten bases of brass; four cubits *was* the length of one base, and four cubits the breadth thereof, and three cubits the height of it.  
> **²⁸** And the work of the bases *was* on this *manner:* they had borders, and the borders *were* between the ledges:  
> **²⁹** And on the borders that *were* between the ledges *were* lions, oxen, and cherubims: and upon the ledges *there was* a base above: and beneath the lions and oxen *were* certain additions made of thin work.  
> **³⁰** And every base had four brasen wheels, and plates of brass: and the four corners thereof had undersetters: under the laver *were* undersetters molten, at the side of every addition.  
> **³¹** And the mouth of it within the chapiter and above *was* a cubit: but the mouth thereof *was* round *after* the work of the base, a cubit and a half: and also upon the mouth of it *were* gravings with their borders, foursquare, not round.  
> **³²** And under the borders *were* four wheels; and the axletrees of the wheels *were joined* to the base: and the height of a wheel *was* a cubit and half a cubit.  
> **³³** And the work of the wheels *was* like the work of a chariot wheel: their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes, *were* all molten.  
> **³⁴** And *there were* four undersetters to the four corners of one base: *and* the undersetters *were* of the very base itself.  
> **³⁵** And in the top of the base *was there* a round compass of half a cubit high: and on the top of the base the ledges thereof and the borders thereof *were* of the same.  
> **³⁶** For on the plates of the ledges thereof, and on the borders thereof, he graved cherubims, lions, and palm trees, according to the proportion of every one, and additions round about.  
> **³⁷** After this *manner* he made the ten bases: all of them had one casting, one measure, *and* one size.  
> **³⁸** Then made he ten lavers of brass: one laver contained forty baths: *and* every laver was four cubits: *and* upon every one of the ten bases one laver.  
> **³⁹** And he put five bases on the right side of the house, and five on the left side of the house: and he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward over against the south.  
> **⁴⁰** And Hiram made the lavers, and the shovels, and the basons. So Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he made king Solomon for the house of the LORD:  
> **⁴¹** The two pillars, and the *two* bowls of the chapiters that *were* on the top of the two pillars; and the two networks, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters which *were* upon the top of the pillars;  
> **⁴²** And four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, *even* two rows of pomegranates for one network, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters that *were* upon the pillars;  
> **⁴³** And the ten bases, and ten lavers on the bases;  
> **⁴⁴** And one sea, and twelve oxen under the sea;  
> **⁴⁵** And the pots, and the shovels, and the basons: and all these vessels, which Hiram made to king Solomon for the house of the LORD, *were of* bright brass.  
> **⁴⁶** In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarthan.  
> **⁴⁷** And Solomon left all the vessels *unweighed,* because they were exceeding many: neither was the weight of the brass found out.  

We have here an account of the brass-work about the temple. There was no iron about the temple, though we find David preparing for the temple *iron for things of iron,* 1Ch 29:2. What those things were we are not told, but some of the things of brass are here described and the rest mentioned.

I\. The brasier whom Solomon employed to preside in this part of the work was Hiram, or Huram (2Ch 4:11), who was by his mother's side an Israelite, of the tribe of Naphtali, by his father's side a man of Tyre, 1Ki 7:14. If he had the ingenuity of a Tyrian, and the affection of an Israelite to the house of God (the head of a Tyrian and the heart of an Israelite), it was happy that the blood of the two nations mixed in him, for thereby he was qualified for the work to which he was designed. As the tabernacle was built with the wealth of Egypt, so the temple with the wit of Tyre. God will serve himself by the common gifts of the children of men.

II\. The brass he made use of was the best he could get. All the brazen vessels were of *bright brass* (1Ki 7:45), *good* brass, so the Chaldee, that which was strongest and looked finest. God, who is the best, must be served and honoured with the best.

III\. The place where all the brazen vessels were cast was the plain of Jordan, because the ground there was stiff and clayey, fit to make moulds of for the casting of the brass (1Ki 7:46), and Solomon would not have this dirty smoky work done in or near Jerusalem.

IV\. The quantity was not accounted for. The vessels were *unnumbered* (so it may be read, 1Ki 7:47, as well as *unweighed*), *because they were exceedingly numerous,* and it would have been an endless thing to keep the account of them; *neither was the weight of the brass,* when it was delivered to the workmen, searched or enquired into; so honest were the workmen, and such great plenty of brass they had, that there was no danger of wanting. We must ascribe it to Solomon's care that he provided so much, not to his carelessness that he kept no account of it.

V\. Some particulars of the brass-work are described.

1\. Two brazen pillars, which were set up *in the porch of the temple* (1Ki 7:21), whether under the cover of the porch or in the open air is not certain; it was between the temple and the court of the priests. These pillars were neither to hang gates upon nor to rest any building upon, but purely for ornament and significancy. (1.) What an ornament they were we may gather from the account here given of the curious work that was about them, chequer-work, chain-work, net-work, lily-work, and pomegranates in rows, and all of bright brass, and framed no doubt according to the best rules of proportion, to please the eye. (2.) Their significancy is intimated in the names given them (1Ki 7:21): *Jachin*—*he will establish;* and *Boaz*—*in him is strength.* Some think they were intended for memorials of the pillar of cloud and fire which led Israel through the wilderness: I rather think them designed for memorandums to the priests and others that came to worship at God's door, [1.] To depend upon God only, and not upon any sufficiency of their own, for strength and establishment in all their religious exercises. When we come to wait upon God, and find our hearts wandering and unfixed, then by faith let us fetch in help from heaven: *Jachin*—*God will fix this roving mind. It is a good thing that the heart be established with grace.* We find ourselves weak and unable for holy duties, but this is our encouragement: *Boaz*—*in him is our strength,* who works in us both to will and to do. *I will go in the strength of the Lord God.* Spiritual strength and stability are to be had at the door of God's temple, where we must wait for the gifts of grace in the use of the means of grace. [2.] It was a memorandum to them of the strength and establishment of the temple of God among them. Let them keep close to God and duty, and they should never lose their dignities and privileges, but the grant should be confirmed and perpetuated to them. The gospel church is what God will establish, what he will strengthen, and what the gates of hell can never prevail against. But, with respect to this temple, when it was destroyed particular notice was taken of the destroying of these pillars (2Ki 25:13,17), which had been the tokens of its establishment, and would have been so if they had not forsaken God.

2\. A brazen sea, a very large vessel, above five yards in diameter, and which contained above 500 barrels of water for the priests' use, in washing themselves and the sacrifices, and keeping the courts of the temple clean, 1Ki 7:23-26, etc. It stood raised upon the figures of twelve oxen in brass, so high that either they must have stairs to climb up to it or cocks at the bottom to draw water from it. The Gibeonites, or Nethinim, who were to draw water for the house of God, had the care of filling it. Some think Solomon made the images of oxen to support this great cistern in contempt of the golden calf which Israel had worshipped, that (as bishop Patrick expresses it) the people might see there was nothing worthy of adoration in those figures; they were fitter to make posts of than to make gods of. Yet this prevailed not to prevent Jerusalem's setting up the calves for deities. In the court of the tabernacle there was only a laver of brass provided to wash in, but in the court of the temple a sea of brass, intimating that by the gospel of Christ much fuller preparation is made for our cleansing than was by the law of Moses. That had a laver, this has a sea, *a fountain opened,* Zec 13:1.

3\. Ten bases, or stands, or settles, of brass, on which were put ten lavers, to be filled with water for the service of the temple, because there would not be room at the molten sea for all that had occasion to wash there. The bases on which the lavers were fixed are very largely described here, 1Ki 7:27-30, etc. They were curiously adorned and set upon wheels, that the lavers might be removed as there was occasion; but ordinarily they stood in two rows, five on one side of the court and five on the other, 1Ki 7:39. Each laver contained forty baths, that is, about ten barrels, 1Ki 7:38. Those must be very *clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.* Spiritual priests and spiritual sacrifices must be washed in the laver of Christ's blood and of regeneration. We must wash often, for we daily contract pollution, must cleanse our hands and purify our hearts. Plentiful provision is made for our cleansing; so that if we have our lot for ever among the unclean it will be our own fault.

4\. Besides these, there was a vast number of brass pots made to boil the flesh of the peace-offerings in, which the priests and offerers were to feast upon before the Lord (see 1Sa 2:14); also shovels, wherewith they took out the ashes of the altar. Some think the word signifies *flesh-hooks,* with which they took meat out of the pot. The basins also were made of brass, to receive the blood of the sacrifices. These are put for all the utensils of the brazen altar, Ex 38:3. While they were about it they made abundance of them, that they might have a good stock by them when those that were first in use wore out and went to decay. Thus Solomon, having wherewithal to do so, provided for posterity.

> **⁴⁸** And Solomon made all the vessels that *pertained* unto the house of the LORD: the altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the showbread *was,*  
> **⁴⁹** And the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the right *side,* and five on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs *of* gold,  
> **⁵⁰** And the bowls, and the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers *of* pure gold; and the hinges *of* gold, *both* for the doors of the inner house, the most holy *place, and* for the doors of the house, *to wit,* of the temple.  
> **⁵¹** So was ended all the work that king Solomon made for the house of the LORD. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated; *even* the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put among the treasures of the house of the LORD.  

Here is, 1. The making of the gold work of the temple, which it seems was done last, for with it the work of the house of God ended. All within doors was gold, and all made new (except the ark, with its mercy-seat and cherubim), the old being either melted down or laid by—the golden altar, table, and candlestick, with all their appurtenances. The altar of incense was still *one,* for Christ and his intercession are so: but he made ten golden tables, 2Ch 4:8 (though here mention is made of that one only *on which the show-bread was,* 1Ki 7:48, which we may suppose was larger than the rest and to which the rest were as side-boards), and *ten golden candlesticks* (1Ki 7:49), intimating the much greater plenty both of spiritual food and heavenly light which the gospel blesses us with than the law of Moses did our could afford. Even the hinges of the door were of gold (1Ki 7:50), that every thing might be alike magnificent, and bespeak Solomon's generosity. Some suggest that every thing was made thus splendid in God's temple to keep the people from idolatry, for none of the idol-temples were so rich and fine as this: but how little the expedient availed the event showed. 2. The bringing in of the dedicated things, which David had devoted to the honour of God, 1Ki 7:51. What was not expended in the building and furniture was laid up in the treasury, for repairs, exigencies, and the constant charge of the temple-service. What the parents have dedicated to God the children ought by no means to alienate or recall, but should cheerfully devote what was intended for pious and charitable uses, that they may, with their estates, inherit the blessing.

